Add Extend Universal Profile functionalities and interfaceIds guide (#846)
lukso-network/docs: docs/learn/expert-guides/universal-profile/extend-profile-functionalities.md

- deploying extensions to the profile
- extending the Universal Profile with extensions
- extending the Universal Profile interfaceIds

To achieve this goal, we will perform the following steps:

1. Deploy contracts that have the logic to be added to the Universal Profile
2. Attach the extension addresses to the Universal Profile

## Introduction

:::info

Read the standard docs about including [LSP17-ContractExtension in the Universal Profile](../../../standards/universal-profile/lsp0-erc725account.md#lsp17---contract-extension).

:::

A Universal Profile contains non-biased features, including generic execution capabilities, the ability to attach generic information, and the ability to be notified and react to various actions. However, post-deployment, a Universal Profile, like any smart contract, becomes immutable. This immutability restricts the ability to add new functionalities into the code of the contract.

To overcome this limitation, the concept of **extensions** is introduced. Extensions are essentially external contracts that act as supplementary modules to the Universal Profile. They provide a dynamic way to enhance the profile's capabilities.

> When a call is made to the Universal Profile for a function that isn't natively part of its primary code, the contract checks if this function exists as an extension. If found, the call is seamlessly redirected to the appropriate external contract (extension), thereby effectively expanding the functionality of the Universal Profile without altering its core, immutable code. This approach enables greater flexibility and adaptability, ensuring the Universal Profile can evolve to meet diverse ments.

Reviewer: I think a global search and replace on "requirements" failed.

I think ments was supposed to be requirements

## Extending Functionalities

### Setup

Set up a new project with:

```bash

> npm init

Reviewer: By default it creates an entrypoint to `index.js` - we prob don't want it

```

Then, install the dependencies

```bash
npm install ethers@v5 @lukso/lsp-smart-contracts@v0.14
```

### Step 1: Instantiate the Universal Profile

#### Generate a Signer

First, we need to generate a signer. This signer will be used to interact with the blockchain. We'll use a private key of the Universal Profile controller and an RPC URL.

```js
import { ethers } from 'ethers';

// RPC URL (e.g., LUKSO testnet)
const RPC_URL = 'https://rpc.testnet.lukso.network';

// Replace with your private key
const privateKey = 'your-private-key';

const provider = new ethers.providers.JsonRpcProvider(RPC_URL);
const signer = new ethers.Wallet(privateKey, provider);

> ```

Reviewer: To what extent do you want to reuse the hardhat setup as described in https://docs.lukso.tech/learn/smart-contract-developers/getting-started

in this guide?

I have the feeling it is done in a different way - but maybe having always this same way of setting up the project is good.

#### Instantiate the Universal Profile Contract

Now, we'll instantiate an instance of the Universal Profile contract.

```js
import { abi as UniversalProfileABI } from '@lukso/lsp-smart-contracts/artifacts/UniversalProfile.json';

// Replace with the address of your Universal Profile
const universalProfileAddress = 'your-universal-profile-address';

const universalProfile = new ethers.Contract(
  universalProfileAddress,
  UniversalProfileABI,
  signer,
);
```

### Step 2: Create the Extension Contract

Next, we will create a Solidity contract named `TipMe` which will inherit from [`LSP17Extension`](../../../contracts/contracts/LSP17ContractExtension/LSP17Extension.md) and have a function `tipMe(..)` that emits an event `Tipped`.

> ```solidity

Reviewer: please add filename as title with folder if relevant

```suggestion
```solidity title="contracts/XXX.sol
```

// SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
pragma solidity ^0.8.0;

import "@lukso/lsp-smart-contracts/contracts/LSP17ContractExtension/LSP17Extension.sol";

contract TipMe is LSP17Extension {
    event Tipped(address tipper);

    function tipMe() public payable {
      // _extendableMsgSender() is a method inherited from LSP17Extension that
      // extract the address who initially called the Universal Profile with the tipMe selector
      // `msg.sender` in this case will be the Universal Profile address/
      emit Tipped(_extendableMsgSender());
    }

    // You can access the value sent to the UniversalProfile with
    // _extendableMsgValue() if the value is being preserved in the UniversalProfile
    // or with msg.value in case the UniversalProfile is forwarding the value to the extension

}
```

> The contract can be compiled with any blockchain development environment like Hardhat or Foundry and extract the abi and bytecode. Create `TipMe.json` in the same directory of the main file.

Reviewer: This is where I think it would be nice to introduce the getting started guide earlier, and put the guide in that perspective. as the getting started already has the script, the luksoTestnet env in hardat networks etc.

}
```

</details>

### Step 3: Deploy the Extension Contract

> We will use the abi and bytecode to deploy the extension contract

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will use the ABI and bytecode to deploy the extension contract
```

```js

> import { abi as TipMeABI } from './TipMe.json';

Reviewer: what is this file?

A hardhat script?

A js file?

I think you can add more context here

import { bytecode as TipMeBytecode } from './TipMe.json';

const TipMeFactory = new ethers.ContractFactory(
  TipMeABI,
  TipMeBytecode,
  signer,
);

const tipMeContract = await TipMeFactory.deploy();
await tipMeContract.deployTransaction.wait();

const tipMeExtensionAddress = tipMeContract.addres;

> ```

Reviewer: Maybe add a console log

`console.log('Contract deployed at:', tipMeExtensionAddress)`

or smtgh - just to make it more user friendly

### Step 4: Encode Function Selector and Store in Universal Profile

:::info Requirements

The address calling the `setData(..)` function needs to have `ADDEXTENSIONS` and `CHANGEEXTENSIONS` permission otherwise the call will fail. Check the [keyManager guides](../key-manager/get-controller-permissions.md) to learn more about permissions.

:::

We need to encode the function selector of `tipMe(..)` and store it in the Universal Profile with a specific data key according to the [LSP17-ContractExtension](../../../standards/generic-standards/lsp17-contract-extension.md) standard.

#### Prepare data key and data value

> ```js

Reviewer: add filename

import { ERC725YDataKeys } from '@lukso/lsp-smart-contracts';

// We get `TipMeABI` from the last step
// import {abi as TipMeABI} from './TipMe.json';
const tipMeInterface = new ethers.utils.Interface(TipMeABI);
const tipMeFunctionSelector = tipMeInterface.getSighash('tipMe()');

// Define the DataKey for the extension
// according to the LSP17-ContractExtension standard
const extensionDataKey =

>   ERC725YDataKeys.LSP17.LSP17ExtensionPrefix +

Reviewer 2: Like suggested to @skimaharvey for his LSP23 guide, I would suggest here to use _erc725.js_ to encode the data key. It will be easier to do rather than having to do it manually.

Also agree with @Hugoo on putting a short link on how the data key is generated.

Author: I'll add a comment, maybe not worth having one more dependency just for the sake of this key

  tipMeFunctionSelector.substr(2) +
  '0'.repeat(32);
```

#### Controlling Value Forwarding to Extensions

> When calling an extension through a UniversalProfile, **in case value was sent along the call**, there's an option to either retain the sent value within the UniversalProfile contract or forward it to the extension contract. This choice depends on the intended purpose of the extension. In scenarios where a single extension is utilized collectively by multiple users, it might be preferable to keep the value within the UniversalProfile. Alternatively, if the extension requires funds to perform specific actions, forwarding the value might be necessary.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When calling an extension through a UniversalProfile, **in case value was sent along the call**, there's an option to either retain the sent value within the UniversalProfile contract or forward it to the extension contract. This choice depends on the intended purpose of the extension. In scenarios where multiple users collectively use a single extension, keeping the value within the UniversalProfile might be preferable. Alternatively, forwarding the value might be necessary if the extension requires funds to perform specific actions.
```

This behavior is controlled by appending a boolean value to the address stored under the extension's data key for a particular function selector.

For example, to forward the value along with the call, the address would be stored with a "0x01" boolean appended:

```js
const tx = await universalProfile.setData(
  extensionDataKey,
  tipMeContract.address + '01',
);

await tx.wait();
```

> **Note**: Ensure that the function in the extension being called is marked as payable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note**: Ensure that the function called in the extension is marked as `payable`.
```

  const universalProfile = new ethers.Contract(
    universalProfileAddress,
    UniversalProfileABI,
    signer,
  );

  const TipMeFactory = new ethers.ContractFactory(
    TipMeABI,
    TipMeBytecode,
    signer,
  );

  const tipMeContract = await TipMeFactory.deploy();
  await tipMeContract.deployTransaction.wait();

  const tipMeInterface = new ethers.utils.Interface(TipMeABI);
  const tipMeFunctionSelector = tipMeInterface.getSighash('tipMe()');

  // Define the DataKey for the extension
  const extensionDataKey =
    ERC725YDataKeys.LSP17.LSP17ExtensionPrefix +
    tipMeFunctionSelector.substr(2) +
    '0'.repeat(32);

  const tx = await universalProfile.setData(
    extensionDataKey,
    tipMeContract.address,
  );
  await tx.wait();

  // Attaching the ABI of TipMe to the Universal Profile so we can call tipMe() function directly on it
  const universalProfileWithExtension = new ethers.Contract(
    universalProfileAddress,
    TipMeABI,
    signer,
  );

  // Calling the tipMe() function on the Universal Profile
  const tipMeTx = await universalProfileWithExtension.tipMe({
    value: ethers.utils.parseEther('0.1'),
  });
  await tipMeTx.wait();
}

main();
```

> ## Extending InterfaceIds

Reviewer 2: Note sure why, but this sub-heading do not appear clear to me in the code review.

<img width="481" alt="image" src="https://github.com/lukso-network/docs/assets/31145285/c195bdc1-eabb-43a5-a02d-3b27f4cbf8ee">

Compared to this:

<img width="524" alt="image" src="https://github.com/lukso-network/docs/assets/31145285/1684459e-8fe7-4a1f-8dbb-32707af4e13f">

Suggest running `npm run start` to double check in the UI they are displayed properly.

> Extending interfaceIds is crucial for Universal Profiles, as many protocols check for support of specific interfaceIds before executing calls to certain functions. Extending interfaceIds typically follows a similar approach to extending functions, with the main distinction being the existance of the `supportsInterface` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Extending `interfaceIds` is crucial for Universal Profiles, as many protocols check for support of specific `interfaceIds` before executing calls to certain functions. Extending interfaceIds typically follows a similar approach to extending functions, with the main distinction being the existance of the `supportsInterface` function.
```

### Step 1: Create a Contract Supporting a Specific InterfaceId

> First, you need to create a Solidity contract that implements the supportsInterface function. This function should return true for at least one specific interfaceId, in this case, a dummy interfaceId like `0xaabbccdd`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, you need to create a Solidity contract that implements the `supportsInterface` function. This function should return true for at least one specific interfaceId, in this case, a dummy interfaceId like `0xaabbccdd`.
```

adding links and reference to supportsInterface (for instance like this one https://docs.lukso.tech/contracts/contracts/ERC725/#supportsinterface ) can't hurt imo

}
```

</details>

### Step 2: Deploy the Extension Contract

We will use the abi and bytecode to deploy the extension contract

```js
import { abi as SupportsInterfaceABI } from './SupportsInterface.json';
import { bytecode as SupportsInterfaceBytecode } from './SupportsInterface.json';

const supportsInterfaceFactory = new ethers.ContractFactory(
  SupportsInterfaceABI,
  SupportsInterfaceBytecode,
  signer,
);

const supportsInterfaceContract = await supportsInterfaceFactory.deploy();
await supportsInterfaceContract.deployTransaction.wait();

const supportsInterfaceExtensionAddress = supportsInterfaceContract.addres;
```

### Step 3: Encode Function Selector and Store in Universal Profile

> :::info ments

Reviewer: typo

> The address calling the `setData(..)` function needs to have `ADDEXTENSIONS` and `CHANGEEXTENSIONS` permission otherwise the call will fail. Check the [keyManager guides](../key-manager/get-controller-permissions.md) to learn more about permissions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The address calling the `setData(..)` function needs to have `ADDEXTENSIONS` and `CHANGEEXTENSIONS` permissions. Otherwise the call will fail. Check the [keyManager guides](../key-manager/get-controller-permissions.md) to learn more about permissions.
```

:::

> We need to encode the function selector of `supportsInterface(..)` and store it in the Universal Profile with a specific data key according to the [LSP17-ContractExtension](../../../standards/generic-standards/lsp17-contract-extension.md) standard.

Reviewer: line 370 you write: supportInterface (without code mode and no (..)

and here you write it like that `supportsInterface(..)`

Choose one team and stick to it so it is consistent and it looks pro.

I reco:

- With code mode and parenthesis `supportsInterface(...)`

```js
import { ERC725YDataKeys } from '@lukso/lsp-smart-contracts';

const supportsInterfaceInterface = new ethers.utils.Interface(
  SupportsInterfaceABI,
);
const supportsInterfaceFunctionSelector = supportsInterfaceInterface.getSighash(
  'supportsInterface(bytes4)',
);

// Define the DataKey for the extension
const extensionDataKey =
  ERC725YDataKeys.LSP17.LSP17ExtensionPrefix +
  supportsInterfaceFunctionSelector.substr(2) +
  '0'.repeat(32);

const tx = await universalProfile.setData(
  extensionDataKey,
  supportsInterfaceContract.address,
);

await tx.wait();
```

### Step 4: Call supportsInterface with the InterfaceId

> Finally, you can verify that the extension was successful by calling the supportsInterface function with the dummy interfaceId `0xaabbccdd`. The function should return true, indicating that the Universal Profile now supports this interfaceId through the extension.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, you can verify that the extension was successful by calling the supportsInterface function with the dummy interfaceId `0xaabbccdd`. The function should return `true`, indicating that the Universal Profile now supports this interfaceId through the extension.
```

---
sidebar_label: '⚙️ Extend a Universal Profile Functionalities'

> sidebar_position: 4
> ---

Reviewer: Could you please add a SEO friendly description?

https://github.com/lukso-network/docs/pull/843

```suggestion
sidebar_position: 4
description: XXXX (max 150char) for SEO
---
```

# Extend a Universal Profile Functionalities

:::info Requirements

> You will need a Universal Profile that you can control via its KeyManager to follow this guide. <br/>
> :arrow_left: If you don't have a Universal Profile yet, follow our previous guide [**Create a Universal Profile**](./create-profile.md).

Reviewer: You might be able to remove the <br/> and just add one blank line - so to not mix HTML and markdown too much

```suggestion
You will need a Universal Profile that you can control via its KeyManager to follow this guide.

:arrow_left: If you don't have a Universal Profile yet, follow our previous guide [**Create a Universal Profile**](./create-profile.md).
```

To overcome this limitation, the concept of **extensions** is introduced. Extensions are essentially external contracts that act as supplementary modules to the Universal Profile. They provide a dynamic way to enhance the profile's capabilities.

When a call is made to the Universal Profile for a function that isn't natively part of its primary code, the contract checks if this function exists as an extension. If found, the call is seamlessly redirected to the appropriate external contract (extension), thereby effectively expanding the functionality of the Universal Profile without altering its core, immutable code. This approach enables greater flexibility and adaptability, ensuring the Universal Profile can evolve to meet diverse requirements.

## Extending Functionalities

### Setup

Set up a new project with:

```bash
npm init
```

Then, install the dependencies

```bash
npm install ethers@v5 @lukso/lsp-smart-contracts@v0.14
```

### Step 1: Instantiate the Universal Profile

#### Generate a Signer

First, we need to generate a signer. This signer will be used to interact with the blockchain. We'll use a private key of the Universal Profile controller and an RPC URL.

```js

> const { ethers } = require('ethers');

Reviewer: you want to use require or import?

Most of our other guides uses ES (import)

i think it might be better to be consistant across all guides and use ES

// RPC URL (e.g., LUKSO testnet)

> const rpcUrl = 'https://rpc.testnet.lukso.network';

Reviewer: ```suggestion
const RPC_URL = 'https://rpc.testnet.lukso.network';
```

it is a const / like a global, i think it is better. like that

// Replace with your private key
const privateKey = 'your-private-key';

const provider = new ethers.providers.JsonRpcProvider(rpcUrl);
const signer = new ethers.Wallet(privateKey, provider);

> ```

Reviewer: just putting this here: https://docs.lukso.tech/learn/smart-contract-developers/getting-started#install-packages--setup-tools

and make sure there is no duplicate with this other file.

In toher guides we say: check the getting started to have everything ready then come back here.

Author: But this page is not related and doesn't provide the code that I have as a setup except the `@lsp-smart-contracts` package, so I don't think its worth referencing a page for this package, also will create some confusion with hardhat

#### Instantiate the Universal Profile Contract

Now, we'll instantiate an instance of the Universal Profile contract.

```js
const UniversalProfileABI =
  require('@lukso/lsp-smart-contracts/artifacts/UniversalProfile.json').abi;

// Replace with the address of your Universal Profile
const universalProfileAddress = 'your-universal-profile-address';

const universalProfile = new ethers.Contract(
  universalProfileAddress,
  UniversalProfileABI,
  signer,
);
```

### Step 2: Create the Extension Contract

> Next, we will create a Solidity contract named `TipMe` which will inherit from `LSP17Extension` and have a function `tipMe(..)` that emits an event `Tipped`.

Reviewer: maybe you can link LSP17Extension to

https://docs.lukso.tech/contracts/contracts/LSP17ContractExtension/LSP17Extension

(relative link ofc)

}
```

</details>

### Step 3: Deploy the Extension Contract

We will use the abi and bytecode to deploy the extension contract

```js
const TipMeABI = require('./TipMe.json').abi;
const TipMeBytecode = require('./TipMe.json').bytecode;

const TipMeFactory = new ethers.ContractFactory(
  TipMeABI,
  TipMeBytecode,
  signer,
);

const tipMeContract = await TipMeFactory.deploy();
await tipMeContract.deployTransaction.wait();

const tipMeExtensionAddress = tipMeContract.addres;
```

### Step 4: Encode Function Selector and Store in Universal Profile

:::info Requirements

The address calling the `setData(..)` function needs to have `ADDEXTENSIONS` and `CHANGEEXTENSIONS` permission otherwise the call will fail. Check the [keyManager guides](../key-manager/get-controller-permissions.md) to learn more about permissions.

:::

We need to encode the function selector of `tipMe(..)` and store it in the Universal Profile with a specific data key according to the [LSP17-ContractExtension](../../../standards/generic-standards/lsp17-contract-extension.md) standard.

#### Prepare data key and data value

```js
const { ERC725YDataKeys } = require('@lukso/lsp-smart-contracts');

> const tipMeInterface = new ethers.utils.Interface(TipMeABI);

Reviewer: in this code snippet, this `TipMeABI` is not defined.

If you need code from previous code snippet to make it work, I suggest to add:

```
// ...

```

in the code snippet to show the suer they need code from previous snippets

const tipMeFunctionSelector = tipMeInterface.getSighash('tipMe()');

// Define the DataKey for the extension
const extensionDataKey =
  ERC725YDataKeys.LSP17.LSP17ExtensionPrefix +
  tipMeFunctionSelector.substr(2) +

>   '0'.repeat(32);

Reviewer: might be nice to explain how this key is generated and where the rules are written (in the standard probably)

  extensionDataKey,
  tipMeContract.address,
);

await tx.wait();
```

### Step 5: Test the Function Call

Finally, test calling the tipMe function on the Universal Profile.

```js
// Attaching the ABI of TipMe to the Universal Profile so we can call tipMe() function directly on it
const universalProfileWithExtension = new ethers.Contract(
  universalProfileAddress,
  TipMeABI,
  signer,
);

// Calling the tipMe() function on the Universal Profile
// Make sure the address associated with the private key have enough native tokens to send

const tipMeTx = await universalProfileWithExtension.tipMe({
  value: ethers.utils.parseEther('0.1'),
});

await tipMeTx.wait();
```

The event should be emitted and the value should be seen on the Universal Profile or the extension contract depending whether the value was retained or forwarded.

### Final Code (Function)

Below is the complete code snippet of this guide, with all the steps compiled together.

```js
async function main() {
  const UniversalProfileABI =
    require('@lukso/lsp-smart-contracts/artifacts/UniversalProfile.json').abi;

  const { ERC725YDataKeys } = require('@lukso/lsp-smart-contracts');

>   const { ethers } = require('ethers');

Reviewer: why do you do the require INSIDE the main? and not just at the top of the file?

  // Attaching the ABI of TipMe to the Universal Profile so we can call tipMe() function directly on it
  const universalProfileWithExtension = new ethers.Contract(
    universalProfileAddress,
    TipMeABI,
    signer,
  );

  // Calling the tipMe() function on the Universal Profile
  const tipMeTx = await universalProfileWithExtension.tipMe({
    value: ethers.utils.parseEther('0.1'),
  });
  await tipMeTx.wait();
}

main();
```

## Extending InterfaceIds

Extending interfaceIds is crucial for Universal Profiles, as many protocols check for support of specific interfaceIds before executing calls to certain functions. Extending interfaceIds typically follows a similar approach to extending functions, with the main distinction being the existance of the `supportsInterface` function.

### Step 1: Create a Contract Supporting a Specific InterfaceId

First, you need to create a Solidity contract that implements the supportsInterface function. This function should return true for at least one specific interfaceId, in this case, a dummy interfaceId like `0xaabbccdd`.

```solidity
// SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
pragma solidity ^0.8.0;

contract InterfaceIdExtension {

> bytes4 constant DUMMY_INTERFACE_ID = 0xaabbccdd;

Reviewer: isnt it missing some tabs here ?

```suggestion
             bytes4 constant DUMMY_INTERFACE_ID = 0xaabbccdd;
```
